3 Conclusions

3.1 Structure comparison
3.1.1 Pairwise significance
	The comparison of small domains that are largely composed of α-helices presents a challenging problem in how to interpret the significance of the RMSD values. As the helical secondary structure elements (SSEs) constitute a sizeable fraction of the domain, it takes only the chance alignment of a few helices to result in a low RMSD over a large proportion of the structure, giving an apparently meaningful result.
	The use of the customised decoy-model sets, as illustrated here, attempts to avoid this problem by recreating a large number of possible folds that were generated using the same (reconnected) SSEs. Moreover, to avoid any chance recreation of native fragments, each comparison always involved the comparison of a native (forward) chain direction with a reversed chain. Using these models, a background distribution of decoy/decoy comparisons allowed us to calculate Z-scores for each native/native comparison between the different Gag proteins. This has the advantage that every comparison in the background distribution involved two models with the same length, density (What does this actually refer to is it some sort of packing of helices, rather than protein density as in Rho) and secondary composition as the native pair. These values indicated a clearly significant relationship between the foamy and ortho CA structures.

3.1.2 Direct or transposed domain order?
	Although the decoy model alignment strategy did confirm the relationship between the foamy and ortho CA structures, the Z-scores did not point to a clear resolution of whether the domains should have a direct correspondence (NN and CC match) or a transposed relationship (NC and CN) as significant individual matches were found across all pairings. Testing for a bias towards more significant like-domain pairings (NN, CC) in the list of similarities ranked by Z-score confirmed the visual bias towards a natural correspondence but only at a marginal level of significance (around 0.05). By contrast, the application of a T-test on the combined raw comparison data returned a very clear distinction between the direct and the transposed relationships, clearly favouring the more natural forward order. However,although the ‘astronomic’ probabilities calculated by the T-test seem very convincing, they must be viewed in the light of the much lower probabilities calculated from the asymmetry statistics. Both calculations involve assumptions and are limited by the small number of known structures so neither can be taken as definitive. Nevertheless it would seem likely that the “true” level of significance may lie somewhere between the two results and as both of these objective assessments point in the direction of the NN and CC domain order, there is no reason to adopt the more unexpected transposed domain order.

3.2 Evolutionary implications
	On the basis of these structural comparisons, and a variety of recently described functional assays (Ball et al., 2016), we can conclude that the central region of the spumavirus gag gene encodes a polypeptide sequence related to that of the corresponding region of orthoretroviral, CA. It therefore seems reasonable to suppose that the last common ancestor of orthoretroviruses and spumaviruses possessed such a sequence. Moreover this region appears to be made up from two related all helical subdomains suggesting a gene duplication event in a common precursor. 
	In our initial search employing foamy virus CA using the DALI program, we made the observation that the strongest similarity of the foamy virus CA domains was actually with a cellular protein, Arc (Activity-Regulated Cytoskeleton-associated protein). Arc is required for neural synaptic growth and activity (Chowdhury et al., 2006; Park et al., 2008; Shepherd et al., 2006; Waung et al., 2008) and mis-regulation and/or deletion contributes to diseases of cognition (Niere et al., 2012; Park et al., 2008; Waung et al., 2008). Arc has widespread and clear sequence homologues as far back as insects and probably deeper, giving it a very ancient origin somewhere close to the metazoan root (Campillos et al., 2006; Volff, 2009) and based on sequence homology Arc is considered to be a relic of an ancient Ty3/Gypsy retrotransposon (Zhang et al., 2015), preserved as a ’living fossil’ in metazoan genomes. Given the structural relatedness of foamy virus CA and Arc, this might suggest an equally ancient origin for foamy virus CA. As it is believed that the Ty3/Gypsy family of retrotransposons gave rise to retroviruses (Llorens et al., 2008), it will therefore be of considerable interest to determine whether the Gag of Ty elements also comprise CA proteins with a two-domain structure. 
	It is also noteworthy that Ty3 Gag is significantly smaller than that of the foamy and orthoretroviruses and although it contains CA related sequences there is no equivalent of either orthoretroviral MA or PFV Gag-NtD, regions of Gag necessary for membrane targeting, budding and extracellular release of virions. Therefore, given the very different structures of MA (Hill et al., 1996; Prchal et al., 2012; Rao et al., 1995; Riffel et al., 2002) and Gag-NtD (Goldstone et al., 2013), this raises the possibility that the MA and Gag-NtD domains of the orthoretroviruses and foamy viruses were co-opted by independent events that has resulted in the viruses employing different mechanisms to facilitate budding from the cell. Notably, Gag from Gypsy, an Errantivirus capable of extracellular replication (Song et al., 1994) and Arc contain additional N-terminal domains. In Gypsy-Gag this domain is distantly sequence-related to orthoretroviral MA (Campillos et al., 2006). By contrast, in Arc it contains a coiled coil region (Zhang et al., 2015) reminiscent of spumavirus Gag-NtD (Goldstone et al., 2013; Tobaly-Tapiero et al., 2001) further supporting the notion of a shared origin for Arc and foamy virus Gag that is distinguishable a from an alternative acquisition pathway giving rise to Gypsy and the orthoretroviruses.
1. 

References
Campillos, M., Doerks, T., Shah, P.K., and Bork, P. (2006). Computational characterization of multiple Gag-like human proteins. Trends in genetics : TIG 22, 585-589.
Chowdhury, S., Shepherd, J.D., Okuno, H., Lyford, G., Petralia, R.S., Plath, N., Kuhl, D., Huganir, R.L., and Worley, P.F. (2006). Arc/Arg3.1 interacts with the endocytic machinery to regulate AMPA receptor trafficking. Neuron 52, 445-459.
Goldstone, D.C., Flower, T.G., Ball, N.J., Sanz-Ramos, M., Yap, M.W., Ogrodowicz, R.W., Stanke, N., Reh, J., Lindemann, D., Stoye, J.P., et al. (2013). A unique spumavirus Gag N-terminal domain with functional properties of orthoretroviral matrix and capsid. PLoS pathogens 9, e1003376.
Hill, C.P., Worthylake, D., Bancroft, D.P., Christensen, A.M., and Sundquist, W.I. (1996). Crystal structures of the trimeric human immunodeficiency virus type 1 matrix protein: implications for membrane association and assembly. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93, 3099-3104.
Llorens, C., Fares, M.A., and Moya, A. (2008). Relationships of gag-pol diversity between Ty3/Gypsy and Retroviridae LTR retroelements and the three kings hypothesis. BMC Evol Biol 8, 276.
Niere, F., Wilkerson, J.R., and Huber, K.M. (2012). Evidence for a fragile X mental retardation protein-mediated translational switch in metabotropic glutamate receptor-triggered Arc translation and long-term depression. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 32, 5924-5936.
Park, S., Park, J.M., Kim, S., Kim, J.A., Shepherd, J.D., Smith-Hicks, C.L., Chowdhury, S., Kaufmann, W., Kuhl, D., Ryazanov, A.G., et al. (2008). Elongation factor 2 and fragile X mental retardation protein control the dynamic translation of Arc/Arg3.1 essential for mGluR-LTD. Neuron 59, 70-83.
Prchal, J., Srb, P., Hunter, E., Ruml, T., and Hrabal, R. (2012). The structure of myristoylated mason-pfizer monkey virus matrix protein and the role of phosphatidylinositol-(4,5)-bisphosphate in its membrane binding. Journal of molecular biology 423, 427-438.
Rao, Z., Belyaev, A.S., Fry, E., Roy, P., Jones, I.M., and Stuart, D.I. (1995). Crystal structure of SIV matrix antigen and implications for virus assembly. Nature 378, 743-747.
Riffel, N., Harlos, K., Iourin, O., Rao, Z., Kingsman, A., Stuart, D.I., and Fry, E. (2002). Atomic resolution structure of Moloney murine leukemia virus matrix protein and its relationship to other retroviral matrix proteins. Structure 10, 1627-1636.
Shepherd, J.D., Rumbaugh, G., Wu, J., Chowdhury, S., Plath, N., Kuhl, D., Huganir, R.L., and Worley, P.F. (2006). Arc/Arg3.1 mediates homeostatic synaptic scaling of AMPA receptors. Neuron 52, 475-484.
Song, S.U., Gerasimova, T., Kurkulos, M., Boeke, J.D., and Corces, V.G. (1994). An env-like protein encoded by a Drosophila retroelement: evidence that gypsy is an infectious retrovirus. Gene Dev 8, 2046-2057.
Tobaly-Tapiero, J., Bittoun, P., Giron, M.L., Neves, M., Koken, M., Saib, A., and de The, H. (2001). Human foamy virus capsid formation requires an interaction domain in the N terminus of Gag. J Virol 75, 4367-4375.
Volff, J.N. (2009). Cellular genes derived from Gypsy/Ty3 retrotransposons in mammalian genomes. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1178, 233-243.
Waung, M.W., Pfeiffer, B.E., Nosyreva, E.D., Ronesi, J.A., and Huber, K.M. (2008). Rapid translation of Arc/Arg3.1 selectively mediates mGluR-dependent LTD through persistent increases in AMPAR endocytosis rate. Neuron 59, 84-97.
Zhang, W., Wu, J., Ward, M.D., Yang, S., Chuang, Y.A., Xiao, M., Li, R., Leahy, D.J., and Worley, P.F. (2015). Structural basis of arc binding to synaptic proteins: implications for cognitive disease. Neuron 86, 490-500.

