1 Introduction
	Taxonomically, the Orthoretrovirinae (orthoretroviruses) and Spumaretrovirinae1 (spumaviruses) make up the two subfamilies of Retroviridae. They share many similarities, including overall genome structures with gag, pol and env genes encoding proteins for replication and life cycles involving reverse transcription and integration into the chromosomes of infected cells. However, there are also a number of differences distinguishing these viral subfamilies, including finer details of genome organisation, the absence of a Gag-Pol fusion protein in spumaviruses and the timing of reverse transcription (Lindemann and Rethwilm, 2011). 
	Gag is the major structural protein of both Ortho and Foamy viruses and is responsible for many of the differences and similarities between the viral subfamilies. Ortho and Foamy viral Gags are required for particle assembly, budding from the cell, reverse transcription and delivery of the viral nucleic acid into the newly infected cell. However, there are a number of striking differences including how the Gag precursor is targeted to the cell membrane, the absence of a Major Homology Region and Cys-His box in Foamy viruses and very different patterns of processing during viral maturation (Müllers, 2013). In all Ortho viruses, Gag is proteolytically cleaved to form distinct, well-studied proteins, matrix (MA), capsid (CA) and nucleocapsid (NC), found in mature virions, whilst in spumaviruses Gag processing to remove a C-terminal peptide occurs only in a fraction of the Gag molecules (Flügel and Pfrepper, 2003). 
	Structural information regarding foamy virus Gag has been limited to the crystal structure of the N-terminal Env binding region of Prototypic Foamy virus (PFV) Gag (PFV-Gag-NtD) that although maintaining some of the function of orthoretrivial MA shared no structural similarity (Goldstone et al., 2013). However, more recently the solution NMR structure of the PFV Gag central CA domains has shed new light on the relationship between ortho and spumaviruses. It reveals that the CA structures of both viral subfamilies share a common protein fold, implying that their Gag proteins may be evolutionarily related (Ball et al., 2016). However, an intriguing aspect of this relationship was an ambiguity in the degree of relatedness between the CA domains of the Gag proteins, with the Spumaretroviral CA domains, NtDCEN and CtDCEN, appearing almost equally similar to either the amino- (CA-NtD) or carboxy-terminal (CA-CtD) domains of the orthoretroviruses. In this paper, we now investigate and clarify the nature of this relationship and discuss its evolutionary implications.
1This class is also commonly referred to as the Foamy viruses (after the morphological effect they have on infected cells) and will be referred by this name frequently below, with the term orthoretroviruses also contracted to ”Ortho viruses”.


Flügel, R.M., and Pfrepper, K.I. (2003). Proteolytic processing of foamy virus Gag and Pol proteins. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 277, 63-88.
Goldstone, D.C., Flower, T.G., Ball, N.J., Sanz-Ramos, M., Yap, M.W., Ogrodowicz, R.W., Stanke, N., Reh, J., Lindemann, D., Stoye, J.P., et al. (2013). A unique spumavirus Gag N-terminal domain with functional properties of orthoretroviral matrix and capsid. PLoS pathogens 9, e1003376.
Lindemann, D., and Rethwilm, A. (2011). Foamy virus biology and its application for vector development. Viruses 3, 561-585.
Müllers, E. (2013). The foamy virus Gag proteins: what makes them different? Viruses 5, 1023-1041.

